Journal of Dentistry 101 (2020) 103466

Detitisthy

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Dentistry
——————

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jdent

Association between longitudinal tooth fractures and visual detection

methods in diagnosis

ot
- ~

ry

Jae-Hoon Kim *, Soo-Heang Eo °  Reetu Shrestha °, Jung-Joon Ihm an Deog-Gyu Seo Se

* Department of Dental Education, Dental and Life Science Institute, School of Dentistry, Pusan National University, Dental Research Institute, Yangsan, Republic of Korea

® HUTOM Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea

© Conservative and Endodontics, National Academy of Medical Science: of Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal
4 Dental Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
© Deparement of Conservative Dentiztry, School of Dentistry and Dental Research Inztitute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Age distribution
Association plot
Crack detection
Cracked

tooth

Probability density function

Objectives: This study investigated the distribution of longitudinal tooth fractures (LTFs) according to the pa-
tient’s age and analyzed the association between visual detection methods and the types of LTFs.

in a dental hospital from September 1, 2009 to March 31, 2014. Naked eye examination, staining with a dye,
Diagnostic surgery was performed to visualize the fracture line in some cases with vertical root fractures. The
final diagnosis was based on the American Association of Endodontists (AE) classification: cracked tooth,
fractured cusp, split tooth, and vertical root facture. The probability density function for each type of LTF was
calculated to assess the risks of LTF development according to age. The association between the detection
methods and types of LTFs was identified using the association plot.

Results: A total of 245 teeth with LTFe were enrolled. Overall, 71.5% of LTFs was observed in patients aged 40-69
years, and 65.7% of LTFs were diagnosed as cracked teeth. The mean age in patients with cracked teeth was 49.3
years, while the mean age in patients with fractured cusps was 59.1 years. A significant association was observed
between the detection method and type of LTF (p< 0.001).

Conclusions: Cracked tooth was the most common type of LTF. The probability of occurrence of cracked teeth
peaked in patients aged approximately 50 years, while the probability of occurrence of fractured cusps peaked in
Clinical significance: TFs occurred mostly in patients aged 40 years and older. Transillumination is useful for the
diagnosis of cracked teeth.

1. Introduction

progression [6,7]. However, recently, long-term clinical studies have
shown that less invasive treatments such as bonded composite restora-

Incomplete and complete non-traumatic tooth fractures commonly
occur in the coronal-apical direction, which is associated with masti-
catory forces [1—3]. Longitudinal tooth fractures (LTFs) can present with
various symptoms ranging from pain on chewing and/or sensitivity to
cold, to unexplained spontaneous pain [1,2,4,5]. The diagnosis and
treatment of LTFs have been challenging for dental practitioners, since
the symptoms are diverse and the cracks are often difficult to detect and
identify [1,2,5]. Complete crowns have been commonly chosen for
treatment of posterior teeth with longitudinal fractures to prevent crack

* Corresponding authors.

tions can be effective treatment for longitudinally fractured teeth [8,9].
Opdam et al. [9] reported that direct composite restorations with cuspal
coverage for cracked teeth showed no failure after a 7-year evaluation
period. Visualization and identification of cracks are needed for accurate
diagnosis and proper treatment (in a less invasive manner) of longitu-
dinally fractured teeth.

There is a lack of consensus on the description and diagnosis of LTFs,
owing to the absence of standard criteria and classifications [1,10]. The
American Association of Endodontists (AAE) classified LTFs into five

E-mail addresses: jhkimdent@pusan.ac.kr (J.-H. Kim), e0.cooheang@gmail.com (S.-H. Eo), reetuz@gmail.com (R. Shrestha), ijj127@snu.ackr (J.-J. thm),

dgseo@snu.ac.kr (D.-G. Seo).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jdent.2020.103466

Received 25 March 2020; Received in revised form 23 July 2020; Accepted 28 August 2020

Available online 31 August 2020
0300-5712/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Clinical Research

Analysis of Factors Associated with Cracked Teeth
0000 이 DDS, MS, PhD,* Young-Ab Yi, DDS, MS, PbD,* Su-Jung Shin, DDS, MS, PbD*

rk, DDS, MS, Pb.

Introduction: The purpose of this study was to analyze
the characteristics, distribution, and associated factors
of longitudinal fractured teeth according to the well-
defined criteria of the American Assodation of Endodon-
tists (AAE). Methods: One hundred seven teeth with
longitudinal fracture from 103 patients were diagnosed
and analyzed. The patients’ signs, symptoms, age, and
sex were noted as well as the tooth number, dental
arch, filling materials, size/classification of restoration,
ack direction, pulp vitality, whether the patient had
undergone endodontic treatment, bite test results,
percussion test results, wear facet, and periodontal
pocket depth. Results: Eighty-seven teeth were diag-
nosed with a cracked tooth (81.3%), 14 were diagnosed
with vertical root fracture (VRF, 13.1%), 4 had a split
tooth (3.7%), and 2 had a fractured cusp (1.9%);
82.2% showed a sensitive reaction on the bite test.
Longitudinal tooth fractures were observed most
frequently in patient in their 40s. The upper first molar
(28.0%) was most frequently cracked, followed by the
lower first molar (25.2%), the lower second molar
(20.6%), and the upper second molar (16.8%). Most
longitudinal tooth fractures (72.0%) occurred mainly in
restored teeth, whereas only 28.0% were found in intact
teeth. Compared with resin (4.7%) or porcelain (0.9%),
the use of nonbonded inlay restoration materials such as
gold (20.5%) or amalgam (18.7%) increased the occur-
tence of longitudinal tooth fractures. Out of 107 of
longitudinal fractured teeth, 33 (30.8%) were treated
endodontically and 74 (69.2%) were not. VRF was asso-
dated with endodontic treatment. Conclusions: The
bite test is most reliable for reproducing symptoms.
The combined use of various examination methods
is recommended for detecting cracks and minutely
inspecting all directions of a tooth. (J Endod
2012;38:288-292)

Key Words
Associated factors, bite test, cracked tooth, longitudinal
tooth fracture, restoration materials

‘racked teeth have been defined as teeth with crack lines that appear in the vertical

(occlusal-cervical) plane over a period of time (1, 2). Discomfort associated with
chewing is the most frequent symptom of cracked teeth, but unexplained sensitivity to
cold is often experienced by patients (3). It is hard to diagnose cracked teeth in clinical
trials, not only because of the complicated and diverse symptoms associated with this
condition but also because of the difficulty in locating crack lines. Asa result, a combi-
nation of simple macrography, transillumination, staining with dyes, diagnostic surgery,
microscopy, and a cone-beam computed tomography scan (4, 5) is necessary to
identify and confirm the presence of cracks.

Even ifa crack is identified, it is difficult to estimate the prognosis because there is
no accurate way to know how advanced the crack has become (1, 2). This condition
has always presented a restorative dilemma for dentists because a crack has an
unpredictable prognosis including extraction (6, 7). The decision to treat and
restore cracked teeth involves a discussion with patients about the prognosis, cost,
and treatment time (2). Therefore, it is important to investigate factors related to
cracked teeth that may provide helpful information about prevention.

Itis unfortunate that there has been a lack of information about the distribution
and characteristics of cracks according to certain criteria. In addition, many authors
have proposed different terminologies and definitions for cracks in teeth (8-11).
Because of confusion caused by the use of different terms, it is necessary to classify
and study cracks according to a unified definition. Therefore, in this study, we
classified longitudinal fractured teeth of patients according to the American
Association of Endodontists (AAE) guidelines (12) and analyzed the characteristics
and distribution of various factors including age, sex, symptoms, signs, direction of
the cracks, type/size of restoration, and diagnostic methods.

Materials and Methods

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of            Severance
Hospital (approval number: 3-2010-0057), and the informed consent of all human
subjects who participated in the experimental investigation reported or described
in this article was obtained after the nature of the procedure and possible discomforts
and risks had been fully explained. Patients visiting the Department of Conservative
Dentistry in Gangnam Severance Dental Hospital who were experiencing unexplain-
able biting pain, suspected of having longitudinal fractured teeth, or clearly presenting
longitudinal fractured teeth during checkup or treatment were examined from July
2008 to June 2009. The final treatment results were recorded during follow-up until
June 2010.

In order to reproduce the symptoms, biting tests were conducted using a Tooth
Slooth (Professional Result, Inc, Laguna Niguel, CA), a roll of rubber, or a cotton
roll, and tooth hypersensitivity was determined using an ice stick. Examination by the

From the *Department of Conservative Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Schoo! of Dentistry, Seoul National University; ‘Department of Prosthetic Dentisty,
College of Dentistry, Yonsei University; and ‘Department of Conservative Dentistry, College of Dentisty, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic

of Korea.

‘Address requests for reprints to Dr Jeong-Won Park, Department of Conservative Dentistry, College of Dentistry, Yonsei University, Gangnam Severance Hospital
146-92 Dogok-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea 135-720. E-mail address: pjw@yuhs.ac

0099-2399/§ - see front matter
Copyright © 2012 American Association of Endodontists.

0i:1 0.101 6) je 2

288 seoetal,

JOB — Volume 38, Number 3, March 2012

